Climate (from Ancient Greek klima, meaning inclination) is commonly defined as the weather averaged over a long period.[7] The standard averaging period is 30 years,[8] but other periods may be used depending on the purpose. Climate also includes statistics other than the average, such as the magnitudes of day-to-day or year-to-year variations. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 2001 glossary definition is as follows:
Climate in a narrow sense is usually defined as the "average weather," or more rigorously, as the statistical description in terms of the mean and variability of relevant quantities over a period ranging from months to thousands or millions of years. The classical period is 30 years, as defined by the World Meteorological Organization (WMO). These quantities are most often surface variables such as temperature, precipitation, and wind. Climate in a wider sense is the state, including a statistical description, of the climate system.[9]
The World Meteorological Organization (WMO) describes climate "normals" as "reference points used by climatologists to compare current climatological trends to that of the past or what is considered 'normal'. A Normal is defined as the arithmetic average of a climate element (e.g. temperature) over a 30-year period. A 30 year period is used, as it is long enough to filter out any interannual variation or anomalies, but also short enough to be able to show longer climatic trends."[10] The WMO originated from the International Meteorological Organization which set up a technical commission for climatology in 1929. At its 1934 Wiesbaden meeting the technical commission designated the thirty-year period from 1901 to 1930 as the reference time frame for climatological standard normals. In 1982 the WMO agreed to update climate normals, and these were subsequently completed on the basis of climate data from 1 January 1961 to 31 December 1990.[11]
The difference between climate and weather is usefully summarized by the popular phrase "Climate is what you expect, weather is what you get."[12] Over historical time spans there are a number of nearly constant variables that determine climate, including latitude, altitude, proportion of land to water, and proximity to oceans and mountains. These change only over periods of millions of years due to processes such as plate tectonics. Other climate determinants are more dynamic: the thermohaline circulation of the ocean leads to a 5 °C (9 °F) warming of the northern Atlantic Ocean compared to other ocean basins.[13] Other ocean currents redistribute heat between land and water on a more regional scale. The density and type of vegetation coverage affects solar heat absorption,[14] water retention, and rainfall on a regional level. Alterations in the quantity of atmospheric greenhouse gases determines the amount of solar energy retained by the planet, leading to global warming or global cooling. The variables which determine climate are numerous and the interactions complex, but there is general agreement that the broad outlines are understood, at least insofar as the determinants of historical climate change are concerned.[15]
Two levels of abstraction are employed in the definition of latitude and longitude. In the first step the physical surface is modeled by the geoid, a surface which approximates the mean sea level over the oceans and its continuation under the land masses. The second step is to approximate the geoid by a mathematically simpler reference surface. The simplest choice for the reference surface is a sphere, but the geoid is more accurately modeled by an ellipsoid. The definitions of latitude and longitude on such reference surfaces are detailed in the following sections. Lines of constant latitude and longitude together constitute a graticule on the reference surface. The latitude of a point on the actual surface is that of the corresponding point on the reference surface, the correspondence being along the normal to the reference surface which passes through the point on the physical surface. Latitude and longitude together with some specification of height constitute a geographic coordinate system as defined in the specification of the ISO 19111 standard.[a]
Since there are many different reference ellipsoids, the precise latitude of a feature on the surface is not unique: this is stressed in the ISO standard which states that "without the full specification of the coordinate reference system, coordinates (that is latitude and longitude) are ambiguous at best and meaningless at worst". This is of great importance in accurate applications, such as a Global Positioning System (GPS), but in common usage, where high accuracy is not required, the reference ellipsoid is not usually stated.
In English texts the latitude angle, defined below, is usually denoted by the Greek lower-case letter phi (f or ?). It is measured in degrees, minutes and seconds or decimal degrees, north or south of the equator.
The precise measurement of latitude requires an understanding of the gravitational field of the Earth, either to set up theodolites or to determine GPS satellite orbits. The study of the figure of the Earth together with its gravitational field is the science of geodesy.
This article relates to coordinate systems for the Earth: it may be extended to cover the Moon, planets and other celestial objects by a simple change of nomenclature.
Latitude on the sphere[edit]
The graticule is formed by the lines of constant latitude and constant longitude, which are constructed with reference to the rotation axis of the Earth. The primary reference points are the poles where the axis of rotation of the Earth intersects the reference surface. Planes which contain the rotation axis intersect the surface at the meridians; and the angle between any one meridian plane and that through Greenwich (the Prime Meridian) defines the longitude: meridians are lines of constant longitude. The plane through the centre of the Earth and perpendicular to the rotation axis intersects the surface at a great circle called the Equator. Planes parallel to the equatorial plane intersect the surface in circles of constant latitude; these are the parallels. The Equator has a latitude of 0°, the North Pole has a latitude of 90° North (written 90° N or +90°), and the South Pole has a latitude of 90° South (written 90° S or -90°). The latitude of an arbitrary point is the angle between the equatorial plane and the normal to the surface at that point: the normal to the surface of the sphere is along the radius vector.
The latitude, as defined in this way for the sphere, is often termed the spherical latitude, to avoid ambiguity with the geodetic latitude and the auxiliary latitudes defined in subsequent sections of this article.
The plane of the Earth's orbit about the Sun is called the ecliptic, and the plane perpendicular to the rotation axis of the Earth is the equatorial plane. The angle between the ecliptic and the equatorial plane is called variously the axial tilt, the obliquity, or the inclination of the ecliptic, and it is conventionally denoted by i. The latitude of the tropical circles is equal to i and the latitude of the polar circles is its complement (90° - i). The axis of rotation varies slowly over time and the values given here are those for the current epoch. The time variation is discussed more fully in the article on axial tilt.[b]
The figure shows the geometry of a cross-section of the plane perpendicular to the ecliptic and through the centres of the Earth and the Sun at the December solstice when the Sun is overhead at some point of the Tropic of Capricorn. The south polar latitudes below the Antarctic Circle are in daylight, whilst the north polar latitudes above the Arctic Circle are in night. The situation is reversed at the June solstice, when the Sun is overhead at the Tropic of Cancer. Only at latitudes in between the two tropics is it possible for the Sun to be directly overhead (at the zenith).
On map projections there is no universal rule as to how meridians and parallels should appear. The examples below show the named parallels (as red lines) on the commonly used Mercator projection and the Transverse Mercator projection. On the former the parallels are horizontal and the meridians are vertical, whereas on the latter there is no exact relationship of parallels and meridians with horizontal and vertical: both are complicated curves.
Plot summary[edit]
Tulsi Virani (Smriti Irani) falls in love with Mihir Virani (grandson of tycoon Govardhan Virani); they marry, although his family chose Payal for Mihir.Tulsi is called Bahu of the family.
She gives birth to Gautam. During Tulsi's second pregnancy, it is learned that her sister-in-law (Aarti) cannot have children. Although Tulsi decides to give them Gautam, Aarti and her husband Kiran kidnap the child. Tulsi goes into labour and gives birth to a daughter, Shobha.
Mihir has four cousins. Chirag (in the TV industry) marries Prajakta—despite objections by his mother, Daksha—who becomes Tulsi's confidante. Sejal and Suhani get married and the fourth cousin, Hemant, marries his assistant Pooja.
Twenty years later, Tulsi and Mihir are the parents of Shobha and a son, Harsh; Sahil and Tarun are Hemant and Pooja's sons. Sejal divorced her husband and lives in the Virani mansion with her daughter, Indu; Chirag is the father of twin daughters, and Tulsi misses Gautam. Hemant, Pooja and Tarun move to Australia; Sahil lives in Mumbai and runs the family business. Chirag moves to the U.S. for a job, and Suhani is happy at home. Gautam returns and Kiran has a daughter, Kairshma. Gautam learns about his birth parents, moves into the Virani mansion and squabbles with Sahil about business. Tulsi arranges his engagement to Ganga, who appreciates the family's support of her widowed mother. Gautam loves Teesha and Sahil loves Ganga, but Sahil and Ganga sacrifice their love and Gautam resents his mother. He divorces Ganga and marries Teesha, Ganga marries Sahil and Shobha is also married. Teesha and Gautam have an accident, and Teesha dies; Gautam marries Damini. Damini and Ganga are both pregnant; when Ganga has a miscarriage, Damini gives her one of her twin boys. The pregnant Shobha is widowed. Tulsi's sister, Kesar, tells Tulsi that Harsh is Tulsi's son. When Kesar held Tulsi's baby in the nursery, her child's father kidnapped it. Kesar gave Tulsi Harsh, saying that she had a miscarriage. Tulsi's son is Ansh Gujaral, son of criminal tycoon Aditya Gujaral (an accomplice of Raj Bhasin, father of Kesar's child). While in jail he gave his son to Gujaral, who raised him. Aditya Gujaral conspires with Ansh to acquire the Viranis' wealth. Ansh becomes obsessed with Nandini, a friend of Karan (Mihir's son with Mandira Kapadia). After 20 years, Tulsi learns about her stepson and accepts him; Karan loves Tulsi more than his own mother. Although Nandini and Karan are in love, Karan gives her to Tulsi's birth son. Nandini marries Ansh out of duty, and he rapes her. Ansh is charged with marital rape; lawyer Meera Singhania becomes Tulsi's friend and fond of Mihir. Ansh escapes and tries to kill Nandini; Tulsi shoots him dead and is imprisoned. Nandini has an accident when she is pregnant with Ansh's child, gives birth to daughter Bhoomi and lapses into a coma. Karan marries Nandini's friend, Tanya, to care for Bhoomi. Ganga has a baby boy, Lakshya. Three years later, when Tanya learns about her pregnancy, Nandini emerges from her coma. Karan and Nandini live together; when she learns about his marriage to Tanya, she accepts Tanya and her child. Aditya Gujaral dies mysteriously, and Karan takes the blame. Nandini confesses to the murder; he was trying to kidnap Bhoomi. Imprisoned for life, she is pregnant with Karan's child. Ansh had a wife (Shraddha) and son (Eklavya). Shraddha is dead, and Gautam adopts Eklavya. Ganga is thrown out of her home when Sahil has an affair with colleague Tripti and marries her. Meera, in love with Mihir, conspires with Mandira against Tulsi. Mihir's mother, Savita, vows to expose the conspiracy. Mandira and Meera arrange Savita's death; Meera blames Tulsi, who is thrown out of her home.
Twenty years later, Tulsi's grandchildren are grown; Nandini, missing from prison, is presumed dead. Ganga is estranged from the family. Tulsi, living in Haridwar and caring for her adopted daughter Krishna Tulsi, returns to Mumbai. Meera's misunderstandings are cleared up, and Tulsi is reunited with her family; Meera is imprisoned for murdering Savita. In the final episode, Parvati (Sakshi Tanwar) from Kahaani Ghar Ghar Kii says that she has Tulsi's grandson, Parth (Karan and Nandini's long-lost son).[20]
At a granular level, rocks are composed of grains of minerals, which, in turn, are homogeneous solids formed from a chemical compound that is arranged in an orderly manner. The aggregate minerals forming the rock are held together by chemical bonds. The types and abundance of minerals in a rock are determined by the manner in which the rock was formed. Many rocks contain silica (SiO2); a compound of silicon and oxygen that forms 74.3% of the Earth's crust. This material forms crystals with other compounds in the rock. The proportion of silica in rocks and minerals is a major factor in determining their name and properties.[2]
Rocks are geologically classified according to characteristics such as mineral and chemical composition, permeability, the texture of the constituent particles, and particle size. These physical properties are the end result of the processes that formed the rocks.[3] Over the course of time, rocks can transform from one type into another, as described by the geological model called the rock cycle. These events produce three general classes of rock: igneous, sedimentary, and metamorphic.
The three classes of rocks are subdivided into many groups. However, there are no hard and fast boundaries between allied rocks. By increase or decrease in the proportions of their constituent minerals they pass by every gradation into one another, the distinctive structures also of one kind of rock may often be traced gradually merging into those of another. Hence the definitions adopted in establishing rock nomenclature merely correspond to more or less arbitrary selected points in a continuously graduated series.[4]
